# Section 54 CGST Act - Refund of tax

Source: https://cbic-gst.gov.in/pdf/CGST-Act-Updated-31082021.pdf (CGST Act 2017, as on 31.08.2021)
Retrieved: 2026-08-28

---

54. Refund of tax.— (1) Any person claiming refund of any tax and interest, if
any, paid on such tax or any other amount paid by him, may make an application before
the expiry of two years from the relevant date in such form and manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that a registered person, claiming refund of any balance in the electronic
cash ledger in accordance with the provisions of sub -section (6) of section 49, may claim
such refund in the return furnished under section 39 in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) A specialised agency of the United Nations Organisation or any Multilateral
Financial Institution and Organisation notified under the United Nations (Privileges and
Immunities) Act, 1947, Consulate or Embassy of foreign countries or any other person or
class of persons, as notified under section 55, entitled to a refund of tax paid by it on inward
supplies of goods or services or both, may make an application for such refund, in such
form and manner as may be prescribed, before the expiry of six months from the last day
of the quarter in which such supply was received.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (10), a registered person may claim
refund of any unutilised input tax credit at the end of any tax period:
Provided that no refund of unutilised input tax credit shall be allowed in cases
other than––
(i) zero rated supplies made without payment of tax;
(ii) where the credit has accumulated on account of rate of t ax on inputs being
higher than the rate of tax on output supplies (other than nil rated or fully exempt
supplies), except supplies of goods or services or both as may be notified by the
Government on the recommendations of the Council:
Provided further that no refund of unutilised input tax credit shall be allowed in
cases where the goods exported out of India are subjected to export duty:
Provided also that no refund of input tax credit shall be allowed, if the supplier of
goods or services or both avails of drawback in respect of central tax or claims refund of
the integrated tax paid on such supplies.
(4) The application shall be accompanied by—
(a) such documentary evidence as may be prescribed to establish that a refund
is due to the applicant; and
(b) such documentary or other evidence (including the documents referred to in
section 33) as the applicant may furnish to establish that the amount of tax and interest, if
any, paid on such tax or any other amount paid in relation to which such refund is
claimed was collected from, or paid by, him and the incidence of such tax and interest had
not been passed on to any other person:
Provided that where the amount claimed as refund is less than two lakh rupees, it
shall not be necessary for the applicant to furnish any doc umentary and other evidences
but he may file a declaration, based on the documentary or other evidences available with
him, certifying that the incidence of such tax and interest had not been passed on to any
other person.
(5) If, on receipt of any such application, the proper officer is satisfied that the
whole or part of the amount claimed as refund is refundable, he may make an order
accordingly and the amount so determined shall be credited to the Fund referred to in
section 57.
(6) Notwithstanding anything con tained in sub -section ( 5), the proper officer
may, in the case of any claim for refund on account of zero -rated supply of goods or
services or both made by registered persons, other than such category of registered
persons as may be notified by the Governm ent on the recommendations of the Council,
refund on a provisional basis, ninety per cent. of the total amount so claimed, excluding
the amount of input tax credit provisionally accepted, in such manner and subject to such
conditions, limitations and safeguards as may be prescribed and thereafter make an order
under sub -section ( 5) for final settlement of the refund claim after due verification of
documents furnished by the applicant.
(7) The proper officer shall issue the order under sub-section (5) within sixty days
from the date of receipt of application complete in all respects.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5), the refundable
amount shall, instead of being credited to the Fund, be paid to the applicant, if such
amount is relatable to—
(a) [refund of tax paid on export of goods or services or both or on inputs or
input services used in making such exports;] (b) refund of unutilised input tax credit under sub-section (3);
(c) refund of tax paid on a supply which is not provided, either wholly or partially,
and for which invoice has not been issued, or where a refund voucher has been issued;
(d) refund of tax in pursuance of section 77;
(e) the tax and interest, if any, or any other amount paid by the applicant, if he
had not passed on the incidence of such tax and interest to any other person; or
(f) the tax or interest borne by such other class of applicants as the Government
may, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify.
[(8A) The Government may disburse the refund of the State tax in suc h manner
as may be prescribed.] (9) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any judgment,
decree, order or direction of the Appellate Tribunal or any court or in any other provisions
of this Act or the rules made thereunder or in any other law for the time being in force, no
refund shall be made except in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (8).
(10) Where any refund is due under sub -section (3) to a registered person who
has defaulted in furnishing any return or who is required to pay any tax, interest or penalty,
which has not been stayed by any court, Tribunal or Appellate Authority by the specified
date, the proper officer may—
(a) withhold payment of refund due until the said person has furnished the
(No. 31 of 2018) – Brought into force w.e.f. 01st February, 2019.
2019 vide Notification No. 39/2019 – Central Tax dt. 31st August, 2019.
return or paid the tax, interest or penalty, as the case may be;
(b) deduct from the refund due, any tax, interest, penalty, fee or any other
amount which the taxable person is liable to pay but which remains unpaid under this Act
or under the existing law.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression ―specified date‖
shall mean the last date for filing an appeal under this Act.
(11) Where an order giving rise to a refund is the subject matter of an appeal or
further proceedings or where any other proceedings under this Act is pending and the
Commissioner is of the opinion that grant of such refund is likely to adversely affect the
revenue in the said appeal or other proceedings on account of malfeasance or fraud
committed, he may, after giving the taxable person an opportunity of being heard,
withhold the refund till such time as he may determine.
(12) Where a refund is withheld under sub-section (11), the taxable person shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in section 56, be entitled to interest at such rate not
exceeding six per cent. as may be notified on the recommendations of the Council, if as a
result of the appeal or further proceedings he becomes entitled to refund.
(13) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, the
amount of advance tax deposited by a casual taxable person or a non-resident taxable
person under sub-section (2) of section 27, shall not be refunded unless such person has, in
respect of the entire period for which the certificate of registration granted to him had
remained in force, furnished all the returns required under section 39.
(14) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no refund under sub-
section (5) or sub-section (6) shall be paid to an applicant, if the amount is less than one
thousand rupees.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,––
(1) ―refund‖ includes refund of tax paid on zero -rated supplies of goods or
services or both or on inputs or input services used in making such zero-rated supplies, or
refund of tax on the supply of goods regarded as deemed exports, or refund of unutilised
input tax credit as provided under sub-section (3).
(2) ―relevant date‖ means—
(a) in the case of goods exported out of India where a refund of tax paid is
available in respect of goods themselves or, as the case may be, the inputs or input
services used in such goods,––
(i) if the goods are exported by sea or air, the date on which the ship or the
aircraft in which such goods are loaded, leaves India; or
(ii) if the goods are exported by land, the date on which such goods pass the
frontier; or
(iii) if the goods are exported by post, the date of despatch of goods by the Post
Office concerned to a place outside India;
(b) in the case of supply of goods regarded as deemed exports where a refund
of tax paid is available in respect of the goods, the date on which the return relating to
such deemed exports is furnished;
(c) in the case of services exported out of India where a refund of tax paid is
available in respect of services themselves or, as the case may be, the inputs or input
services used in such services, the date of––
(i) receipt of payment in convertible foreign exchange [or in Indian rupees
wherever permitted by the Reserve Bank of India] 89, where the supply of services had been
completed prior to the receipt of such payment; or
(ii) issue of invoice, where payment for the services had been received in advance
prior to the date of issue of the invoice;
(d) in case where the tax becomes refundable as a consequence of judgment,
decree, order or direction of the Appellate Authority, Appellate Tribunal or any court, the
date of communication of such judgment, decree, order or direction;
(e) [in the case of refund of unutilised input tax credit under clause (ii) of
the first proviso to sub -section (3), the due date for furnishing of return under section 39
into force w.e.f. 01st February, 2019.
for the period in which such claim for refund arises;] (f) in the case where tax is paid provisionally under this Act or the rules made
thereunder, the date of adjustment of tax after the final assessment thereof;
(g) in the case of a person, other than the supplier, the date of receipt of goods
or services or both by such person; and
(h) in any other case, the date of payment of tax.
55. Refund in certain cases. — The Government may, on the
recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify any specialised agency of the
United Nations Organisation or any Multilateral Financial Institution and Organisation
notified under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947, Consulate or
Embassy of foreign countries and any other person or class of persons as may be specified
in this behalf, who shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be
entitled to claim a refund of taxes paid on the notified supplies of goods or services or
both received by them.
56. Interest on delayed refunds. — If any tax ordered to be refunded under
sub-section (5) of section 54 to any applicant is not refunded within sixty days from the
date of receipt of application under sub- section (1) of that section, interest at such rate not
exceeding six per cent. as may be specified in the notification issued by the Government on
the recommendations of the Council shall be payable in respect of such refund from the
date immediately after the expiry of sixty days from the date of receipt of application
under the said sub-section till the date of refund of such tax:
Provided that where any claim of refund arises from an order passed by an
adjudicating authority or Appellate Authority or Appellate Tribunal or court which has
attained finality and the same is not refunded within sixty days from the date of receipt of
application filed consequent to such order, interest at such rate not exceeding nine per
cent. as may be notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council
shall be payable in respect of such refund from the date immediately after the expiry of
of the financial year in which such claim for refund arises; ‖ by The Central Goods and Services Tax
(Amendment) Act, 2018 (No. 31 of 2018) – Brought into force w.e.f. 01st February, 2019.
sixty days from the date of receipt of application till the date of refund.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, where any order of refund is made
by an Appellate Authority, Appellate Tribunal or any court against an order of the proper
officer under sub -section (5) of section 54, the order passed by the Appellate Authority,
Appellate Tribunal or by the court shall be deemed to be an order passed under the said
sub-section (5).
57. Consumer Welfare Fund. — The Government shall constitute a Fund, to
be called the Consumer Welfare Fund and there shall be credited to the Fund,—
(a) the amount referred to in sub-section (5) of section 54;
(b) any income from investment of the amount credited to the Fund; and
(c) such other monies received by it, in such manner as may be prescribed.
